Hello and welcome to Python for Everybody.
I'm doing a worked example,
my name's Charles Severance and
I'm the instructor for the class.
And the worked example that we're going to
work on right now is in Chapter 5, and
it is Exercise 1.
We're going to repeat, asking for
a number until the word done is entered.
And then we're going to print the total,
and then we're going to print the count.
And then we're going to print
the average at the end,
and we're going to enter some numbers.
And then we've got to do
some error checking, and
we're going to keep on going.
So we'll ignore this,
we'll just say Invalid input, and
then we're going to ignore it.
So I'm going to start from scratch,
I'm going to write I'll start my terminal.
I'll start some Atom. and so I can,
I've opened the py4e folder.
And that's kind of cool because
now I can do things like say,
new folder and
say I'd like an exercise 05_01.
And then go into exercise 05_01 and
say File, New File.
And then say, File, Save As.
And put it in ex_05_01, and
then name the file ex_05_01.py.
I'm going to start
from scratch on this one,
instead of adapting another piece of code.
I'll say print Five and
I'm going to do this
because now I need to
get to the point where
I'm in the same folder
in this terminal window,
cd Desktop/py4e/ex,
I can string these together.
And there I am and
I say python3 ex and there I go, okay?
So I'm in good shape.
So there's a couple things right now and
we're going to do the total count and
average.
And so, this is just a basic
pattern where we're going to have,
we're going to need an iteration
variable for the count.
I'll call that num,
we start that at 0, and then tot,
and I'll start that at 0.0, so that's
the running count and the running total.
Now we need to write a loop, and I'm
going to write this as an infinite loop,
while True, with colon, and then I'll
indent, and I'll prompt for a string,
and remember input gives us a string,
so I'm going to call this sval = input.
Enter a number, colon, space,
I'm going to deal with the try and
except later.
But you can just kind of know that the
floating point value that we're going to
do is, sometimes this little
bit of code will fail.
I'm just going to take
the string value here, sval.
This input returns us a string, and
now I'm going to convert that to a float.
I'm going to say print fval.
So I can print that out.
And then I'm going to do
the num = num + 1,
and tot = tot + fval.
Now, I do need to deal with the situation
where I'm entering the word done.
Now we want to check that before we
convert it to a float because done,
well we can run this.
It's an infinite loop, but
it'll only run a little bit.
It won't cause us too much problem.
If I run Python,
let me drag this over here, and
I go 1, 2, 3, and
if I put in something bad, it's
running. I don't have a way to get out.
But you can see that it blew up on line 5.
It blew up right here in line 5.
So what we want to do is we
want it to say 1, 2, 3, done.
But we want it to detect that we typed
in done, so here we'll just say if
the string value that I got back from
input is double equal quote done quote,
break.
So that basically will break us out.
And now, print "ALL DONE".
I should be using single quotes here.
Too much Java coding.
print 'ALL DONE'.
Then I want to say print,
what do I want to print?
The total, the num, and then
tot, num, tot/num.
Now we've got to be careful,
because we don't want to divide by 0,
but that will get us sort of a ways.
So this is going to run,
it's going to read these things.
It's going to accumulate here.
This is the accumulator pattern.
This is a counter pattern where we're
adding 1 to a current variable and
accumulator pattern where
we're adding a value to it.
So now we should be able to see the done.
4, 5, and 6, and then done.
And the total of 4
plus 5 plus 6 is 15.
The number is 3 and the average is 5.
So that's really good,
the ALL DONE prints out.
I just did that for yucks and
you can see the value that's coming up.
So that's in pretty good shape, so
I'm going to comment this out,
and comment that out.
So this is pretty good, it works just
the way we want it to work, 4, 5, 6.
But if we do something
other than we're done,
then we're going to blow up in this float.
And so this is where we're going to
have to do a try and except.
Because we just know that this line,
line 7, line 7 is the danger zone, okay?
So what we're going to do is we're
going to put a try in here and
then we're going to indent the part
of code that seems strange.
And then we're going to
have some except code.
And the first thing we have
to do in the except code,
is print out the word Invalid input.
Come back,
print, Invalid input.
Now, just like in an earlier example,
we have to do something here to make
sure it doesn't just keep on going.
because if fval doesn't work, we're not
going to see the error message that would
be the traceback here on line 9.
We're going to run here, but we still
don't want to add because fval will be
so this is where we can use the continue.
So in this code we're using both
the break to say if I'm all done, break.
And if I have a problem,
I'll print a message out.
And then I'll say continue, so continue
basically says go back to the top, so
that is how when we see enter some
bad data, we print an Invalid input,
and without adding anything new,
you don't really see it here.
Without adding anything new, you go back
up to the top and enter a second thing.
So now, if everything is right, I
should be able to type bad input.
4, 5, 6, bad input, bad input, done.
And I have a total of 15, and I have
three items, and the average is 5.0.
So, there we go.
That's what we are going to get and
that roughly achieves
this same thing and
it's a combination of a loop
with a exit mechanism. We have some
sanity checking of our input,
so making sure that we
have some valid input.
And we catch it, and
we use continue to loop back up to
run the next iteration of the loop.
And we have an accumulator pattern, and
then we can use the accumulated data
to print what we want to print.
So I hope that this has
been useful to you,
exercise 5.1 for Python for Everybody.